# Pico 2 I2S Audio DSP Framework

This program is a real-time Audio DSP framework built using the RP2350
(Raspberry Pi Pico 2). It uses PIO to implement 4-wire (send and
receive) i2s.  PIO also implements all needed clocks using side sets.

It is presented in YouTube video: https://youtu.be/IiyGa5ss1Dw

NOTE: This README is describing a later version of the software than
shown in the video.  The code is reorganized and now supports FIR and
IIR filters.

Git tag video_pico2_dsp_skeleton refers to the older version, but it's
best to use the latest version.

A PCM1808 i2s ADC provides input data and a PCM5102A i2s DAC converts
samples back to analog for output.

A cyclic triple buffer DMA is used.  While software processes one buffer,
the ADC DMA is filling the next and the DAC DMA is sending the previous.
Software sample processing is in-place.

File main.c supports several processing options.  Look for the comment
in main.c about defining USE_XX.  You can choose a define to process
using an FIR or IIR filter.  Or generate a sine wave or multiply the
right and left input channel.  Just define the USE_XX value for what
you want and then rebuild.

Files gen_fir_firwin.py, gen_fir_firwin2.py, and gen_iir.py are python
scripts that use numpy and scipy to generate filter coefficients. You may
hve to install numpy and scipy.

All of them have a --help option.  They generate fir_coeffs.h (for
FIR) or gen_iir.py (for IIR).  Of them, gen_fir_firwin2.py is the
least obvious.  You give it a sequence of frequency gain pairs.  Like
this:

    gen_fir_firwin2.py --taps 401 --points 0 1.0 9000 0.1 24414.0625 1

This generates IIR coefficients with a dramatically steep roll off:

    gen_iir.py --order 12 --fc 4000 --btype lp --ftype ellip

## PCM1808 Module Warning

I bought two PCM1808 modules via Amazon.  These are the modules with
the 5 prominent capacitors.  Only one of the two modules worked
properly.  The problem with the bad module was with component values
for the external anti-aliasing filter.  See the applications section
of the PCM1808 data sheet for more on this.  There is a circuit
diagram that shows simple RC low-pass filters being used for both the
right and left inputs.  The bad module used C = 100 nF and R = 10K
Ohms.  This gives a theoretical cut off frequency of around 150 Hz
(200 Hz measured).  This is obviously no good for a component that is
supposed to be dealing with much higher frequencies.

I made my bad module work by removing the offending four components
and bridging across the removed resistor pads.  Doing this with tiny
surface mount components is a hassle.

## Hardware Setup

The PIO heavily utilizes side-set instruction mappings. Therefore
SCK, BCK, and LRCK require contiguous sequential GPIO pin numbers.

### Hardware Device Settings

Both the PCM5102A and the PCM1808 are configured by pins tied low or high.
#### PCM5102A
    FLT: GND (normal latency filter)
    DEMP: GND (no de-ephasis)
    XMST: 3.3V (Don't hard mute)
    FMT: GND (use i2s)
    SCK: GND (Use internal PLL)
    VIN: 5V
#### PCM1808
    FMT: GND (use i2s)
    MD0: GND (slave mode)
    MD1: GND (slave mode)
    SCK: Clock generated by Pico2.
    Power: Needs both 3.3 and 5V.

### Pinout

Look at main.c

Pin numbers can be set in the hardware macros inside main.c. However,
clocks 10, 11, and 12 must strictly remain sequential.

## Software Pipeline Execution Details

PIO generates all clock schedules explicitly using simple integer
dividers from a 150MHz core clock to yield an exactly 48828.125 Hz
sample stereo rate without jitter.  Yes, that's a weird sample rate.

## Building

Install the PICO C SDK according to its instructions.  You can see
install_pico_sdk.txt for a summary of what I did, a manual install
without an IDE.

### For this program:

    make a directory someplace and cd to it
    git clone https://github.com/ARM-software/CMSIS-DSP.git
    git clone https://github.com/grughuhler/rpi_pico_related.git
    cd rpi_pico_related/pico2_dsp_skeleton
    # Be sure PICO_SDK_PATH is set to directory of pico-sdk
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
    make

Note: build failed on Fedora 43 with a compiler internal error (by
definition a bug in the compiler).

Tested OK on Ubuntu 24.04 LTS.  This will produce
pico2_dsp_skeleton.uf2, the file you load onto the Pico2 using BOOTSEL
via pressing the button while powering on (see Pico docs) or using
picotool,

    picotool load -f pico2_dsp_skeleton.uf2 -x
